# Extractions: Observed Mode

Observed mode allows you to keep track of how many times you've seen an extraction accross multiple reports using an STIX 2.1 Observed Data SDO.

This mode will extract the same things as when Analysis mode is used ([see Analysis Mode](/extractions-analysis-mode.md)), however, will include the addition of STIX 2.1 Observed Data SDO.

## Observed Data SDOs (`observed-data`)

For every extraction type where an SCO is created (ipv4, ipv6, File name, File hash, Directory, Domain, URL, Email Address, MAC Address, Windows Registry Key, User Agent, Autonomous System Number, Cryptocurrency, IBAN, CPE, Credit Card) an Observed Data Object is also created for each unique SCO (note, if reusing old SCO a new Observed Data Object is not created, see following section).

```json
{
    "type": "observed-data",
    "spec_version": "2.1",
    "id": "observed-data--<GENERATED BY STIX2 LIBRARY>",
    "created_by_ref": "identity--<IF TLP RED/AMBER/GREEN USER IDENTITY ID>",
    "created": "<REPORT CREATED PROPERTY VALUE>",
    "modified": "<REPORT MODIFIED PROPERTY VALUE>",
    "first_observed": "<FIRST REPORT CREATED PROPERTY VALUE>",
    "last_observed": "<LAST REPORT CREATED PROPERTY VALUE>",
    "number_observed": "<COUNT OF TIMES SCO WITH SAME TLPHAS BEEN SEEN PREVIOUSLY BY FILE2STIX>",
    "object_refs": [
      "<ID OF SCO SEEN>"
    ],
    "object_marking_refs": [
      "marking-definition--<TLP LEVEL SET>"
    ],
    "external_references": [
      {
        "source_name": "file2stix",
        "description": "This object was created using file2stix from the Signals Corps.",
        "url": "https://github.com/signalscorps/file2stix"
      }
    ]
}
```

The `number_observed` property is set to 1 on creation.

Everytime file2stix reuses an SCO in a bundle, the related Observed data objects `number_observed` property is increased by one.

For example, if the same SCO is seen in 5 reports all marked TLP White (and all all properties are identical), then this will represent 1 SCO, thus one Observed Data SCO, and therefore `number_observed` will be 5 for the 5 reports. If it is seen again in a report marked TLP white, then the count will increase to 6.

Using another example to illustrate the influence of TLP level; If 1 of these 5 reports in TLP Green and the rest are TLP White (with all other properties at upload the same), 2 SCOs and 2 Observed Data Objects will exist. The `number_observed` in the TLP White Observed data Object will be 4, and in the TLP Green Object the `number_observed` will be one (assuming these are the only 5 reports with this observable detected).

One final example; If 2 reports are uploaded as TLP Red and attributed to two different identities both containing the same Observable (with all other properties at upload the same) then 2 SCOs will be created, 2 Observed Data Objects will be created. Assuming these are the only 2 reports that contain this observable, then the `number_observed` will be 1 in each Observed Data Object.